## User interface design

When we are talking about User Interface Design, it is not a conversation about subjective art. On the contrary, it is an objective principle form of human conversation and behaviour. It is like Steve Jobs said: “Design is not just what it looks like and feels like. Design is how it works” (Steve Jobs). But in spite of this, User Interface is based on a good User Experience design. These two Principles are connected to each other. The problem nowadays is often that we have interfaces everywhere in hotel lobbies, on smart phones, even on check out processes in some shops. But is that the right way to stack everywhere on top an interface? Golden Krishna, one of the most famous Google designer made a theory about user interfaces that considered the **no UI is a good UI** theory. His approach is about solving problems with getting in touch with the problems, not about stacking a complex User Interface on top of it. Furthermore, this kind of user interfaces often would need an own interface that explains them – that is ridiculous. Focusing on the main problems people are having – in the example of a web page, to find the right information about the topic they googled – it is the duty of a designer to help the user finding the solution as fast as possible not with clicking through a User Interface that is outside. Obviously, the design should not confuse the user it should lead them to the solutions they need.
> cf. Vimeo Krishna, Golden – The Best Interface is No Interface: https://vimeo.com/48629451, 29.02.2017

In a world, where communication is the most important tool in the toolbox of an artist User Interface should be evaluated by how well it communicates with the end-user. Ways of human communication should drive the design workflow and not the request of features or requirements that a crazy guy in the sales department thought, that it would be nice to sell. Moreover, it is essential to remove all the blocking stuff on the communication channel so that the loss of information is as small as possible. Accordingly, it is not possible to remove any kind of information loss. Of course, there is always a small barrier but it is the job of a good User Interface to keep this barrier as small as achievable.
> cf. McKay, Everett – https://de.slideshare.net/EverettMcKay/ui-is-communication-how-to-design-intuitive-usercentered-interfaces-by-focusing-on-effective-communication, 29.02.2017