# The Layout

The layout is not an invention of the 21 century – even the web transferred this part from the print and measured it with pixels, but that was difficult after the web was growing. Concerning that, the layout is a long developed product and the idea of reusing it is great, nevertheless, it had to develop itself and should not stick too close, to fixed measurements.
> cf. Keith, Jeremy: The Road To Resilient Web Design – https://www.smashingmagazine.com/2017/03/resilient-web-design/, 2017.03.25

Travelling back in time to the year 800 AD to the beautiful island called Ireland somewhere in a stone hut there was a monk sitting and thinking about the layout of Europe's greatest manuscript treasures. The Book of Kells a medieval treasure, named after a town in County Meath is a Cristian manuscript that was painted on 680 pages of vellum. The stunning moment of this book is, that every page has a different layout which is connected to the others. On particular pages, the corners were filled with detailed Celtic designs, distinguished by varied colours.
> cf. Kearney, Martha: The Book of Kells: Medieval Europe`s greatest treasure? – http://www.bbc.com/culture/story/20160425-the-book-of-kells-medieval-europes-greatest-treasure, 25.03.2017

Communicating a message is the purpose of this book and it does really well with all the calligraphic elements and illustrations that conveyed the message in a specific context to transmit the Cristian credo of this book. But thinking about the variables that have to be considered by the monks during the design process of the book, everything was fixed. The measurements of the vellum, the inks – nearly everything. Taking a step further in history to the age of Gutenberg`s invention of movable type letters and the revolution of printing was born. Now it was able to produce multiple copies with much less labour. Even the design patterns were reused. Like drop caps were cut out of wood and columns were carried over from manuscripts like the Book of Kells. Nevertheless, the variables were all known and it was easy to solve the equation. Stepping further in history to the zenith of the print techniques with the Swiss Style, a structured layout and a clear typography was invented by famous typographs like Jan Tschichold and Josef Müller-Brockmann. They invented typographic scales like a grid system and a type area. The advantage of knowing all variables enables the designer to built consistent layouts with maximum effect.
> cf. Keith, Jeremy: The Road To Resilient Web Design – https://www.smashingmagazine.com/2017/03/resilient-web-design/, 2017.03.25