## The beginning of web design

Migrating the layouts from paper to the screen and the measurements from millimeters to pixels was the beginning of web design. Web conquered the world in the early 1990s, and this was the time where the internet was considered in fixed screen widths. All screens had a width of 640px, so the designs were made for this size like before on paper. By the way, this was the time where websites were built with tables, so after the birth of HTML. Time was passing, and more people got screens with 800px and designers changed their layouts. After few changes the settled on the magic number of 960px. Nowadays this figure is still seen on some websites out there. On the other hand, the percentage was a new way of accomplishing layouts in a fluid way, and it was possible to produce flexible designs. Even though, it is hard for designers to develop a liquid behaviour on a page when the layout applications are stuck to a fixed with artboard. Although, web designers can benefit from learning about the centuries of print design. Massimo Vignelli – an entrepreneur of the Swiss Style – invented the Canon, that includes responsibility and timelessness, obviously everything that could be applied to the web. So instead of the known constraints of paper web offers the dimension of a device. To sum it up all the relevant key facts in web design already existed like fluid grids, flexible images, that preserve their ratio and the media query to detect proportions and sizes. With all these tools it is possible to fill all the unknowns and solving the equation of web design.
> cf. Keith, Jeremy: The Road To Resilient Web Design – https://www.smashingmagazine.com/2017/03/resilient-web-design/, 2017.03.25

### The unpredictable user

Designers want to control the page they are designing; they want to target specific browsers and versions. Developers are implementing hack after hack to ensure a cross-browser and cross-platform experience that is identical. However, the designer or the developer is not able to control the device and the operating system of the user in any way. Even the user can zoom in or out. They can reduce the font size or the size of a browser window. As a consequence, the designer has to be aware of the fact that users are sitting in the driver`s seat. The assertion that a site has to look similar on every device is wrong in every direction. The awareness of display resolutions, network speeds and other obstacles that harm the layout is crucial.
> cf. Kadlec, Tim: Implementing Responsive Design: Building sites for an anywhere, everywhere web. (First Edition) – 1249 Eighth Street, Berkeley, CA 94710: New Riders, 2013, p.3 – 8

Some years ago there was the approach of separate sites, tackling the problem of the diversity of devices. That was the point where a mobile page was developed next to the desktop site. Often these pages were served under the subdomain m.domain.com. On the one hand this approach has some benefits in kind of structuring content for this device separately, but on the contrary, the maintenance and development effort is twice. So the scalability is not given. Considering that a web project is never finished – there are always feature requests or bugs for newer versions – this approach was fast superseded from the responsive strategy. The device agnostic concept of responsive design was revolutionary. The impact was immense, developing sites with less effort and reaching a broad range of devices. In particular, this approach laid on the principle of progressive enhancement.
> cf. Kadlec, Implementing Responsive Design, p.11 – 18