## Types of layouts

As can be expected there is no golden rule for creating layouts on the web. Apparently, there are several approaches out in the design world, and it is the responsibility of the designer to find the right tool for the right layout. Zoey Mickley Gillenwater defined in her book ”Flexible Web Design" four types of layouts. The fixed-width, the liquid or often called fluid, the elastic and finally the hybrid layout. Each of the previous approaches has its benefits, constraints and obstacles.
> cf. Ebd., p. 22

### Media queries

Media queries are like the jam on top of a slice of bread. It is edible without it, but it puts a layer of satisfaction on top of the bread. This so called media queries enabling the developer/designer to decide which kind of styles should be displayed in a particular size, resolution of the screen. It is even possible to detect if the page should be printed on paper or viewed in the browser. Moreover, it can detect de pixel ratio for retina screens and so on. It can be a real powerful tool in the right hands for iron out the remaining edges in the layout.
> cf. Ebd., p. 54

### Breakpoints

When media queries are applied to a page in addition to a fluid or hybrid layout, often they should only serve content for a specific range of pixels. For example to detect all tablets. To achieve this behaviour, there is a development concerning called mobile first. This approach is based on the progressive enhancement technique and starts with adding styles for mobile devices. It is built like a screening machine, with several grains. As larger the viewport width, as deeper is the browser falling into the media queries. This procedure is built with the min-width property to catch always the next grain level. This different sizes of screens are called breakpoints on the web. In the case of the Altwiener Christkindlmarkt, where five major breakpoints considered to catch following device spans from mobile to desktop screens.

| min px | max px | device            |
| ------ | ------ | ----------------- |
| 0      | 510    | Mobile Devices    |
| 511    | 768    | Tablets           |
| 769    | 1200   | Laptops           |
| 1201   | 1440   | Desktops          |
| 1441   | ∞      | Ultra Wide        |

### Fixed-width layouts

The fixed-width approach was transmitted from the paper layout where the site width is constraint by a fixed width measured in pixels. As previously mentioned 960px is a very common value in the past five years of development, this value has the benefit of a high divisibility for grid-based layouts, so it offers a variety of grid options. On the one hand it gives much control to the designer, but on the contrary, it has a lot of edges to consider, the user is not watching the site with a device, that matches the ideal width of 960 or 1024px. So, in that case, the site is going to be scaled, or the user has to scroll vertical and horizontal to get all the information. This might be a problem in user experience design.
> cf. Ebd., p. 23 – 25

### Fluid layouts

Liquids inspired the term fluid, or often called liquid. Water is always taking the remaining space. So when water is dropped into a glass, it will always fill the remaining space up to the edge. The same behaviour is processed on the web. Instead of specifying dimensions in pixels it is calculated in percentage. So it is always up to 100%. For example, the sidebar takes 30% then the main content will get the remaining 70%. Now if the browser window is going to be resized the ratio is kept. On the one hand it prevents horizontal scrolling, but on the other hand, this solution might be too large on televisions and too small on mobile devices. For that reason, fluid layouts should be combined with media queries.
> cf. Ebd., p. 25

### Elastic layouts

Considering a box that fills all the width of a page might lead to long line lengths of text. This might reduce the readability a lot. Thinking about printed magazines, which are offering a small column width for enhanced readability, this should be transferred to the web as well. Elastic layouts are the solution for a typographic nerd. They are similar to fluid layouts with the fact that the font size drives them. This font size is measured in em. One em has the width of a quad (german Geviert) – a size established in the printing area. In designing layouts, the root em short rem is used. This unit is referring to the body font size. For example, if the body font size is 16px, accordingly 2em would be 32px. A long history of research found out that the optimal line length for improved readability is between 45 and 70 characters. To sum it up a container width of 55rem would be the perfect measurement for an article width. Unfortunately, elastic layouts can cause horizontal scrollbars on mobile devices like fixed width layouts.
> cf. Ebd., p. 26

### Hybrid layouts

Hybrid layouts are the combination of the preceding examples with all their abilities. This case is crucial if the sidebar should have an exact width of 300px and the main article should fill the remaining space. Obviously, it is very common for advertisings. Google Ads have the requirement of a fixed width of 300 pixels. Instead of designing the whole page with a fixed layout, rather it is wise to consider a hybrid layout and prevent horizontal scrollbars. This was previously done by floating elements all the way. Alternatively flexbox a new CSS feature and the upcoming flexbox grid enabling this functional without messing around with the float property and connected clear-fixes.
> cf. Ebd., p. 26 – 27