## What is HTML5

If it is talked about HTML5, the talk is going to be about a Hyper Text Mark Language short HTML. In general, it is like a structuring language for content. In other words, the content is described. The interpreter is told that this line of code is a headline of the first section or this area is a sidebar. The interpreter, in many cases a modern web browser can handle these markups and render it. HTML5 is a superseding of HTML4 and all previous versions of HTML. It is some sort of the *next generation of HTML*, so it is the scaffolding for a new way of web application and websites. To sum up, HTML5 takes advantage of new features which are shifting the way of browser experience. Mentioning just some benefits HTML5 is cross-platform compatible, so everything that is needed is a modern web browser that can interpret these new tags and definitions. Despite these facts, it is a new way of a formal documentation for unwritten standards in most browsers. So it was a shift for developers to rely on new features in a way that every browser interprets these elements according to a standard. HTML5 brings some new features as well. Semantic elements like `<header>`, `<footer>` or `<article>`. Geolocation, a persistent local storage, offline web applications or even microdata to extend the vocabulary of HTML5 with custom semantics.
> cf. Pilgrim, Mark: HTML5 – Up and Running. (First Edition) – 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA 95472: O’Reilly Media, Inc., 2010, p. 11 – 12.

Turning to the point that it is desired to use, HTML5 features on the web application. The question, if it is possible to use HTML5 on the web page is misleading, probably HTML5 is not one big library, it is a collection of features and some browsers only supporting a variety of features, like certain tags or video elements. Obviously, it is possible to detect the support of those features. But getting familiar with the detection techniques it is necessary to get familiar with the Document Object Model, short DOM.
> cf. Pilgrim, HTML5 – Up and Running, p. 29

### The DOM

So what is the Document Object Model? It is not the source code that is written in a .html file. Therefore the DOM is the result of a source code parsed by the browser, even though it is not the source code if, in the browser, the dialogue box of view source code is clicked. As can be expected View Source shows exact the HTML that makes up the page. If one wants to have a look at the DOM, it is needed to inspect the site with the developer tools. There is a brief overview of all document nodes. They can be clicked to expand the child nodes. So it is a box model where every box is wrapped in another box. So if a DOM manipulation is preferred during the runtime of a page – in the case of user interaction – JavaScript has to be taken in advance. It is possible to fetch some DOM-Nodes or Single Nodes with a simple `document.querySelector('container');`. This would return the first Node of type container. Now, this node can be stored in a variable and manipulated later.
> COYIER, CHRIS: What is the DOM? – https://css-tricks.com/dom/, 10.03.2017

In other words, JavaScript is a language the browser can understand and interpret. On the contrary, there is the DOM – the place where the magic happens. So facing this two arguments is is possible to say, that JavaScript is a DOM accessing and manipulating language, where events can be watched and attached to some DOM nodes. In other words, give a click event to a button that executes a function when the button is pressed.
> COYIER, CHRIS: What is the DOM? – https://css-tricks.com/dom/, 10.03.2017

"The (…) DOM is an application programming interface (API) (…) It defines the logical structure of documents and the way a document is accessed and manipulated."
> W3C: What is the Document Object Model – https://www.w3.org/TR/DOM-Level-2-Core/introduction.html, 10.03.2017

In point of detection techniques for HTML5 features, we are accessing the `window` or `navigator` object and testing if the property for the particular feature is available in this context. For this kind of measurement, there is an HTML5 detection library called Modernizr. It is open source and under the MIT-licence and detects the support for HTML5 and CSS3 features. It is important to include this script in the `<head>` tag of the page. This is crucial because the script is needed before the DOM is built up so that it can check the support of the features. This is possible because page rendering is blocked until the script is loaded and executed.
> cf. Pilgrim, HTML5 – Up and Running, p. 30


### Using HTML5 tags and getting rid of the boxing hell

If a look is taken back in the early beginnings of HTML and the web, HTML was only a structuring language like XML or maybe Markdown. It was a site where the text was placed in like in a word document easy as that. Of course, it was possible to change the background colour or the font family. But in the early beginning of web HTML was not considered to be used for individual layouts and arranging objects on the page. Although one essential feature like a table was used misleading and not the way, it meant. Tables were considered for tables (nothing else), besides the fact that using tables is only a good option for displaying a score table or something that fits into a table design. However, considering tables in a responsive fluid layout is always a constraint in web development.
But developers struggled a lot with the arrangement problem till the float was invented in CSS 2.1. Then it was possible to float containers and position them. The final change came in the HTML version 4 where a new container occurred. The div element was born. HTML4 came with a lot of breaking changes, and one of them was a standard box without any additional styling. It was like a LEGO Box, where it was possible to nest things deeper and deeper. As can be expected this was the point where maintainability of websites was even more crucial as before. The problem was the end of the closing divs. That was the point where the site had a tree with ten closing divs at the and – that was a pleasure to figure out which one was the correct one. In the same way, it was even harder for search engines or crawlers to get semantical information about the page. Apparently, all relevant information about a page was then put in the meta information in the head section of a page. In other words, people wrote a huge list of any information only in the keywords section to be better rated at Google. In this case, it was hard to find the right page over a search engine because so much misleading information was given to the search robots. 
Thanks to the invention of HTML5, now it was possible to build a correct semantical page, and the Google bots could focus on retrieving the information directly from the page without concentrating on wrong keywords or meta descriptions.
Furthermore, it was a breath of relief for developers, as it was way easier to figure out what the content describes a header was a header tag and not a div with a class name.
The following example shows the difference in the closing tag. The starting tag is maybe easier to read, but the real benefit is the closing tag where you see immediately that the header is closed.

**without HTML5 syntax**

``` html

  <div class="header">
    <h1>My Header</h1>
  </div>

``` 

**with HTML5 syntax**

``` html

  <header>
    <h1>My Header</h1>
  </header>

``` 

For structuring, the page sections instead of div elements following new containers were created to enhance the semantic of the document. The `<section>` node set up to describe a section in a document. In a section, it is recommended to structure the text in so-called `<article>` nodes. In contrast, an article node could contain a variety of section elements. These article nodes are describing a stand-alone content, that can be independently from the rest of the page.  Besides, there was a tag for a sidebar `<aside>`, that is very common in blog or newspaper layouts. As well for navigations, the `<nav>` tag was invented that can only contain navigation links.
> MDN: HTML element reference – https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element

### The HTML5 Storage

Heading up to part of storing data it is necessary to know, that storing key/value pairs in browsers was a fundamental thing before the introduction of the so-called Web Storage – some browsers are referring to it as the "Local Storage" or "DOM Storage". Looking to the historical part of storing elements in the browser cookies seemed like a good solution in these days. On the one hand, it appeared to be a good idea storing data persistently even after navigating away from the site or closing the browser. But on the contrary, it is unlike with cookies. You have to send it manually if you want to transmit it to the remote web server.
Considering the use of the local storage you need not be aware of using it, accordingly, the browser support is fantastic if you check the Table.
> cf. Pilgrim, HTML5 – Up and Running, p.128 – 129

| IE   | Firefox | Safari | Chrome | Opera | iPhone | Android |
| ---- | ------- | ------ | ------ | ----- | ------ | ------- |
| 8.0+ | 3.5+    | 4.0+   | 4.0+   | 10.5+ | 2.0+   | 2.0 +   |
> Can I use: Web Storage - name/value pairs – http://caniuse.com/#search=localStorage, 13.03.2017

```javascript
  // included in the <head> section of the page

  var fontversion = '1';
  var fontcache = 'fontcache-altwiener-markt';

  function addStyles(_styles) {
    var style = document.createElement('style');
    style.innerHTML = _styles;
    var script = document.getElementsByTagName("script")[0];
    script.parentNode.insertBefore(style, script);
  }

  try {
    var s = window.localStorage.getItem(fontcache);
    if (s !== null) {
      var parts = s.split('####');
      if (parts.length !== 2 || parts[0] !== fontversion) {
        window.localStorage.removeItem(fontcache);
      } else {
        addStyles(parts[1]);
      }
    }
  } catch (e) {
    console.warn('A Problem occurred by setting the Fontcache: ', e);
  };
```


```javascript
  // included before the closing </body> tag of the page

  (function(ls, x) {
    try {
      if (ls.getItem(fontcache) === null) {
        var h = new x();
        h.open('GET', '/styles/fonts.css');
        h.send();
        h.onload = function() {
          addStyles(this.responseText);
          ls.setItem(fontcache, fontversion + '####' + this.responseText);
        }
      }
    } catch (e) {
      console.warn('A Problem occurred by retrieving the Fontcache: ', e);
    }
  })(window.localStorage, XMLHttpRequest);
  ```
