## CSS and SCSS

When we are heading to the point of styling our page, CSS is the only solution. CSS *(Cascading Style Sheets)* is a language written on top of HTML to markup tags and control the layout and design of web page. If a web page was surved on the Internet in the year of 1995 and a closer look would be taken at the websites of this period, many developers would recognise, that CSS was not invented yet. The pages consist out of a straight line orientated layout with any styles. Now we have the third major version of CSS, and we are facing the beta version of CSS4. Accordingly, we are hitting a point where CSS might be impressive for many developers in fact of all possibilities. In the beginning, let us start with the benefits CSS brought to a sluggish web page. First of all, with CSS, we have the choice to format text, paragraphs and headlines. It is possible to change the font family, the size, the font weight and even the letter spacing – like we are used from print publishing tools like InDesign. Besides, it is possible to indent paragraphs or apply drop caps to them, in other words, you can style them like a magazine layout. The next useful point is with CSS it is possible to arrange Objects – in our case divs and HTML5 tags – to provide a box model layout. In the old days, this was hacked with the float property – like the HTML tables, the float property was not meant for this, it was provided for text floats around images. 
> cf. Sawyer McFarland, David: CSS3 – the missing manual. (Third Edition) – 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA 95472: O’Reilly Media, Inc., 2013, p. 1f

Nevertheless, the web and particular CSS got the *Flexbox Layout* shortly flexbox. This new feature aims to be more efficient in the way to layout and align items with distributing space in a container. The most significant benefit of this property is that it can be applied even if the size is unknown or dynamic. This is a huge advantage in responsive and fluid layouts and was a shift in so-called flexible Layouts. It is possible that containers expand automatically to fill free space or shrink them to prevent overflows. In other words, it provides a flexible layout for any device or screen size. The primary goal of flexbox was to arrange small-scale layouts within a grid component. Even though the CSS grid is in production and not supported in every browser – flexbox is used for grids as well in the moment. The flexbox properties are well supported now (Internet Explorer 11+ and all other major browsers) and giving us a new dimension in arranging objects in the way it is meant to.
> cf. Coyier, Chris: A Complete Guide to Flexbox – https://css-tricks.com/snippets/css/a-guide-to-flexbox/, 16.03.2017


### Anatomy of a Style Declaration

To understand the functionality of CSS, it is important to now that CSS is not a programming language. Instead, it is a declaration based markup, which describes with a selector and a declaration block, which adjectives should be applied on these elements, selected by the selector. Often this kind of style declaration is easy to understand, as it is similar to English. As an example, following style rule might be considered. `p { color: black, font-family: Henriette,  font-size: 1em }`. This example describes the properties for a standard paragraph, "Make the text black and take the font Henriette and make it 1em tall". So It is pretty clear what is the message.
> cf. Sawyer McFarland - CSS3 – the missing manual, p.36 – 37

If a deeper look is taken at the previous declaration, we will see that it is built out of certain components. First of all, we need the selector, that tells the browser which element or elements on a page to select – in our case, it was a paragraph. The next element is the declaration block, we can identify it with an opening curly brace and with a closing curly brace. Inside this declaration block, we will see the list of declarations for the selected element. A declaration consists out of a key value pair. As can be expected, a Property like `font-size` and value. This value can be a string, number, hexadecimal colour like `#333333` or an URL like `url('./images/background.jpg')`. Important is to that a key: value pair ends with a semicolon so that the browser recognises that a statement too. As the browser trims all whitespaces and tabs, that are used for formatting the styles. 
> cf. Ebd., p.37

### The selectors

The essential part of a style rule is the selector, that magically selects a part or multiple parts of the page where the rule should be applied. The selector is the unit in front of the opening curly bracket. It can be a simple tag name that would select all types of this tag on every page where the style is embedded. The second option and probably the most common option is the class selector. This selector starts with a simple dot in front of the class name – the class name can be chosen by the developer itself. Likewise, the id selector consists out of the same pattern logic,  besides the fact that it starts with a hash instead of a dot. There are several advanced selectors like Pseudo Elements and Attributes that can select Tags according to some data attributes with globbing and so on. One important part is the grouping of selectors, which enables the developer to group selectors separated by a comma to save redundant code. Of course, that is an essential part saving every byte of data to provide fast web performance. The developer should consider similar patterns and group them to save lines. That is the time where SCSS is entering the stage. But let us take a look at the hierarchy of the selectors at this point, before heading to SCSS. The main difference between all theses selectors is the way they are overruling each other. It is their impact. There is a simple rule giving hierarchy to the selectors as more specific a selector is as more weighted is this rule. For example one of the strongest selectors is the *id selector* which is entirely clear. According to the W3C specification, an id can only occur once on a page. These results that an id is the most accurate selector. On the contrary, there is the globbing selector written as a star. This selector takes advantage over every current tag. As can be expected this selector takes place to the point of resetting particular browser styles so that the result is equal to every device. There is a library called reset.css that takes advantage of this use case. The second common way to specify a selector is to give reference to their parents. We can pass a selector through a pipe which makes them more explicit for example `.header .container div.logo`. Considering this technique, selectors can grow extensively, and the reusability is not guaranteed.
> cf. Sawyer McFarland - CSS3 – the missing manual, p.56 – 90

That was the point where a module-based class naming convention should be applied. BEM and SMACSS to the help. SMACS or *(Scaleable and Modular Architecture for CSS)* is a way how CSS rules are structured. The base idea is to categorise CSS rules in 5 different topics to provide reusable patterns.

1. Base
2. Layout
3. State
4. Module
5. Theme

A well-structured development environment categorises these rules within different folders and naming conventions. Layout rules would start with a simple *l-* in front of the name, and a state should contain the suffix *is-*. Following this concept should lead to a more human-readable code that is necessary for working groups or teams.
> cf. Snook, Jonathan: Scalable and Modular Architecture for CSS – A flexible guide to developing sites small and large. (First Edition) – Snook.ca Web Development, Inc., 2011, p.6 – 20

The BEM *(Block Element Modifier)* architecture is a naming convention for web components which provides strong class names. This convention is used by nearly every well-known company out there to provide a consistent way of building components and providing an excellent reusability for this patterns. The concept is that you do not need to stack a long pipe of selectors that the readability is improved. The BEM concept is standing on the shoulders of web components, that means that it is splitting up big monoliths in small molecules. The children of a molecule – the atoms – are written with the naming convention of `.molecule-name__atom-name`.
> cf. BEM: Key concepts – https://en.bem.info/methodology/key-concepts/, 18.03.2017

``` css
h1 { // tag selector
    font-family: 'Henriette', sans-serif;
    font-size: 3.4rem;
}

.headline { // class selector
    font-family: 'Henriette', sans-serif;
    font-size: 3.4rem;
}
```

``` css
.navigation {
    // styles for the navigation
}

.navigation__item {
    // styles for the navigation item
}
```

### How to include Style Declarations

Apparently, a single style rule won't transform the page into a masterpiece of art. For writing code that turns the page the way we imagined, it is necessary to include a collection of style rules and declarations.   When we are heading to the point of including our styles on the web page, there are three options. First of all, there is the possibility of writing styles directly in a tag like: `<p style="font-size: 16px">Text</p>`. This option is not recommended and takes only place in styling e-mail templates. The two options, which are important for the web, are the internal or the external style sheet.
> cf. Sawyer McFarland - CSS3 – the missing manual, p.39 – 40.

State of the art at including styles in a web page is the external stylesheet. These options consists of a .css file, that is loaded with a link tag like the following example: `<link rel="stylesheet" href="styles/main.css" />`. The previous example takes to arguments a rel attribute, that defines the type of the content – a stylesheet – and the href attribute that takes an absolute or relative URL to the located file. The advantage of this solution is the cache factor. Normally this file would cause an HTTP Request and every HTTP Request slows down our site. But with a service worker, it is possible to store this file in the service worker storage so that the browser can cache it. To prevent old cache issues if something is changed a version number is provided to the file so that the browser knows, if the version number is changing it should request the file again.
> cf. Ebd., p.40 – 41.

Even though the benefits of external stylesheets, are great with the caching factor, the second option of the internal stylesheet has some advantages as well. This internal styles are written inside a `<style></style>` tag, that is located in the `<head>` section of the page. Obviously, this has to be in the head area, because this information is needed before the page is rendered so that the page is going to be rendered with these style information. For that reason, this technique is used for optimising the page for Googles above the fold. That means we provide all information for the visible area of the first 1080px of the page in an inline tag. Even though good developers do not write this code directly in the head section, it is rendered in this section during the built process where all prerequisites are going to be concatenated and uglified and minimised.
> cf. Ebd., p.39 – 40.

### why using SCSS

Overall the previously mentioned benefits are still the question why should SCSS be taken. SCSS is a subset of CSS which provides additional features. After nine years of development, SCSS is a mature addition to CSS. But as can be expected SCSS does not run in the browser. SCSS has to be compiled to CSS with a built step. This is often done by pure Node.js build languages like gulp with the npm *(Node Package Manager)* package *gulp-scss*. Turning to the benefits of SCSS there is the concept of using variables. This enables the functionality of declaring variables for any information. In other words, we can define once a variable for the colour on the beginning and use it everywhere in the whole project. If the colour should be changed later, it is one simple click to change it, and every occurrence is replaced as well. The second power of SCSS is mixins and loops. In that case, patterns can be defined to speed up the development process and to save time in production.
> cf. SASS-lang: http://sass-lang.com/, 18.03.2017