## The breath of life with JavaScript

When it is time to put life in our web applications you will step over  JavaScript. It is like the topping on the birthday cake. Furthermore, it brings the opportunity to create complex and great web apps. For instance, if a music player is needed or a swiper that displays a bunch of pictures it is only possible with JavaScript. Moreover, with JS – the short version of JavaScript and the file type with a dot before – it is possible to store values inside variables. In addition, it is possible to take logic inside if conditionals or looping over an array of numbers or objects.
> cf. Mozilla: What is JavaScript? – https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/JavaScript/First_steps/What_is_JavaScript/ 21.03.2017

Besides this functionality JavaScript is always mollycoddled by backend engineers with the argument. Come on it is a scripting language not more – it runs only in the browser! Nevertheless, that was in the beginning but JavaScript is now mature and considered often as the most important programming language in the age of web apps. The argument that JavaScript is only for the browser is as old as a tyrannosaurus rex. With Javascript, it is possible to create native apps for android and iOS with the same Code. Writing AngularJS on top of NativeScript enables this feature. It is possible to get access to native features like the camera or the geo locations. And all written in plain JavaScript. The same is on the server side where PHP was long thought as the one and only solution. Featured through big Content Management Systems like Wordpress it got its throne. But time has changed and Node.js rises like a phoenix out of the ashes. Node.js is JavaScript on the server which has multiple benefits. First of all, the big benefit is for developers, that they do not have to switch between different languages when working on a web project. They can now write the same language in the backend as in the frontend. Of course, this brings benefits in the aspect of reusable code patterns. Besides this fact, JavaScript is lightning fast and provides new ways in reactive programming paradigms, in handling async streams through its core power the V8 engine written by the biggest browser Company out there – Google. This open-source high-performance JavaScript engine is written in C++ to enable such fast performance and is used by Node.js and Chromium, known as a popular browser. The performance boost of the V8 is done by the accurate garbage collection that gives speed to JavaScript.
> cf. Google: Chrome V8 Introduction – https://developers.google.com/v8/, 21.03.2017

### The benefits of a static type system.

Summarising the listed features JavaScript is more than awesome, but what are the benefits of a static type system? Similarly, like the namesake Java, JavaScript got mature. As can be expected the strong type system has many benefits on debugging large web applications. So many errors would catch up by building the project, not at runtime. This is one problem, but maybe a big benefit of JavaScript. There are several communities on the web, on the one hand, there are the big TypeScript lovers out there that are totally convinced from the work of the three big technology companies: Microsoft, Google and Facebook that are working together on this big project. But on the other hand, there is the fraction that says that it is a complete overhead. Finally, TypeScript is writing Javascript with type information and compiling to JavaScript without type information. So many people out there would think now – pretty useless? But the concerning of TypeScript is not a better, faster output of JavaScript, instead, it is an approach to document the source code in a human readable way so that working in groups is easier to handle through conventions and rules. This is achieved with providing interfaces and so-called typings for libraries. The biggest benefit in the opinion of many developers is the Intellisense that suggests functions and operation on type in the right development environment. In fact of bug finding and bug fixing, the compiler provides the developer with more accurate information about the call stack and the type information that are given to the breaking area. TypeScript is built on top of the ECMA5 or short ES6 standard of JavaScript that is not running out of the box in any browser. That is the reason why it has to be compiled to the previous version of ES5. This new version of JavaScript or called the Future version enables a bunch of nice features known from mature languages like Java. The most stunning feature is the class-based development which enables object orientated programming. This leads from a functional language more to a swiss knife for everything. 
> cf. Syed, Basarat Ali: TypeScript Deep Dive – https://basarat.gitbooks.io/typescript/content/docs/why-typescript.html, 21.03.2017

Considering the previous mentioned arguments TypeScript was the best choice for the Altwiener Christkindlmarkt in the case of maintenance. Considering a long lasting customer with a growing project it was important to take future technologies to be on the latest trend. In conclusion, it speeded up the development workflow so that it was not necessary to take advantage of many third party libraries. It was easy to create an own software architecture so when something has to be fixed, no code written by a stranger has to be maintained.