## Content Management System

When we are reaching the point of feeding the website with content, there are several approaches. First, we have a static site, which means, that the content is hard coded in the template files. On the one hand, a big benefit of this solution is, that it is very cost saving. Moreover, for low budget projects, it might be a good solution when the content isn't changing very often. But on the other hand, it requires individual skills in web technologies. Apparently, it often demands that some editors have to learn CSS and it is all quite complicated to maintain. This is the point where we hit the content management system short CMS. 

The benefit of this technology is that it provides an own admin interface in the browser, where the content of the page can be inserted into text fields and without any know-how in web technologies like HTML, CSS and JavaScript. The leading company in the field of low-price CMS is WordPress. It is an open-source free to use, MIT licenced product which was designed primarily for blogs and newspapers. The area of the enterprise CMS solution is full of monoliths, often written by big tech company itself, but to mention one, it would be ContentNode. This enterprise CMS solutions called ECMS providing a vast range of business logic or publishing stages – that is not needed on small projects.

### Why WordPress was not the best solution

The decision of choosing the right CMS is sticked to a lot of circumstances and variables being considered. In that case, the most important question is the technology stack, as can be expected there is a huge variety of content management systems out there for every platform – the example of WordPress would be the PHP Stack which includes MySQL as a relational database. The problem with WordPress is the staging. In other words, having a development system on the local machine, a production environment, and a life system on the web. This implies that all the content and data should be the same so that the developer can work with real data from the editor. Because of that, WordPress was not the best solution. Of course, WordPress has some benefits, but always dumping the database is way too exhausting for maintaining an equal data structure. Above all WordPress is a good solution when the editor is used to it, or the previous version was on WordPress as well – but in the case of the Altwiener Christkindlmarkt, where no CMS was defined a completely different approach was taken. The API-driven CMS.

### The API-driven CMS

Talking about an API-driven CMS is not a talk about rocket science anymore – accordingly, it is something new on the market, and of course there are big companies which are using them. In the example of one of the most major competitors out there, Prismic has big customers like Ford, Google and New Relic. Even if they are not as familiar with static site generators or popular CMS systems, API driven CMS systems are having a significant benefit – they are platform independent. This implies that the developer can choose his favourite stack without being forced by the CMS. Especially nowadays it is critical to choose the right stack for development. The main reason why developers are choosing an API-based CMS architecture, is to separate the content management from the frontend implementation and the business logic. As the example, WordPress is messing up with PHP logic and Content fetching. Obviously, it leads to messy and unreadable code. In other words, it is hard to maintain, and talking about websites, it is a progress, which never ends – needs and technologies are shifting and developing faster, and faster and a website has to be on the latest technologies. That is the huge benefit of an API solution is, to fetch all the data once with one API call, requesting the content. After this call is received, the data can be processed without turning any complexability inside. In the example of the Altwiener Markt, all the data is passed as a JSON – Javascript Object Notation to the template files where it gets rendered accordingly to the structure in the CMS.
> cf. Gable, Levi: The API-Based CMS Approach – https://css-tricks.com/api-based-cms-approach/, 18.03.2017

### Storyblok as example

Take a deep thought about the childhood where playing with Lego blocks was a pleasure, maybe it is still a pleasure, and that is the point where Storyblok is entering the stage. Think about all the benefits of an API based CMS and combine them with the advantages of a Lego box where everything is a small block that can be shifted and nested unlimited. The smallest block is as small as the developer can imagine like an atom inside a molecule. For example, the smallest block can be a headline. That can be nested in a link block, again and again. This modularity was inspired by the Frontend technique of BEM – a Block Element Modifier (they built the concept of modular blocks and patterns on a website in case of naming conventions in HTML and CSS). They took the logical functionality of Web Components. This Block encapsulates the behaviour, the templating and the styling in a separate equivalent named file. Every template file is an own component in the CMS. This structure is represented by a huge JSON where every story has a body where all the blocks are nested in arrays. All in all, it is an Array of objects which is iterate able with a template language.
> cf. Angerer, Dominik: How Storyblok works – https://www.storyblok.com/docs/Prologue/Introduction/, 18.03.2017
> cf. BEM: Key concepts – https://en.bem.info/methodology/key-concepts/, 18.03.201717