##  Using a Content delivery Network

When having a server in one location might be a cheap solution but this solution as has an impact on the response time of the server. Obviously, if the server is located in Frankfurt and someone in Frankfurt accesses this server then the connection might be fast. However, the user is not always located where the server is located that leads to the problem that if the user is visiting the page in America he had to cross the cable bunch of the whole Atlantic to request the data from Frankfurt. If this happens the response time could be increasing dramatically from 200ms to five till eight seconds. Even if the visitor range is located in Europe there are big differences at the response time. However the google bot is located everywhere in the world and the result time the google bot scores are important for the Search Engine ranking – in this case for google. 
To improve this performance a Content Delivery Network short CDN is a golden rule in Web performance and SEO techniques. This CDN is a collection of multiple web servers located all around the world to increase the response times. On the one hand the efficiency of accessing the server is much more powerful and fast, but on the other hand, it results in cost savings as well. Often a dedicated server is paid after requests and transferred MegaByte. Furthermore, a CDN can cache these things and check if a user is a returning user. 
> cf. Souders, Steve: High-Performance Web Sites. (First Edition) – 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA 95472: O’Reilly Media, Inc., 2007, p. 18

> "Only 10—20% of the end-user response time is spent downloading the HTML document. The other 80—90% is spent downloading all the components in the page."
> Souders. High-Performance Web Sites. p. 19

With this words, the end-user response is good determined. Accordingly, it is very important to cache these static assets like images or vendor files like polyfills or shims. Besides the fact that they are not changing very often they can cached up to a year.
> cf. Ebd. p. 19 – 21