## Optimizing above the fold

When the word above the fold is mentioned, then frontend engineers are talking about **progressive rendering**. That means, that taking care of the performance of a page during the load is important. Furthermore, we want to display every content as soon as possible. Especially this is important for pages that are containing a lot of content and images, or where the user has a slow internet connection. But how is it possible to indicate this progress of loading, so that the user understand the roll-up of the site? Times where a loading indicator with a progress bar where shown are gone. Nobody wants to wait five seconds till he is able to get any information about a web page or web app. That is the reason why progressive rendering is so important. Because after the main Document – the page – is transmitted it starts to parse every line by line and rendering the content. However, the problem is that if something that blocks the rendering is in the top of the page it has to wait all the time till this content is loaded and the visitor is viewing in this time a white blank screen. To avoid this behaviour there are some golden rules to consider.
> cf. Souders. High-Performance Web Sites. p. 37 – 41

### Stylesheets at the top

The first rule is to put styles to the top, in the head section of the page. Otherwise, it would delay the page loading and cause the white screen issue. But concerning a large main.css where all style rules for the whole page are located in could be inefficient as well. Therefore the solution is to split theses files up into a file that only consists out of the rules, that are necessary for the area that is visible without scrolling called Above The Fold or shortly ATF. To provide both files in a different way the solution is to include the styles which are not needed at page built up after the HTML tag to be sure that these files are loaded afterwards. Obviously, we have to include the other file in the head section of the page. To enhance the page with a little speed boost we could save one request – as known, requests are time and cost intense – with inlining this stylesheet in the head tag. To ensure that every browser can handle the style tag provided after the closing HTML tag there is a slim JavaScript library called loadCSS, that does this for every browser. That function is loading the main.css with simple DOM operation after the page is loaded. 
> cf. Souders. High-Performance Web Sites. p. 40 – 44

### Scripts at the bottom

When looking at the rule of stylesheets at the top, it was easy to understand why moving the styles to the header is important for progressive rendering. But taking a closer look at the scripts the solution is just the opposite. It is way better to include the scripts at the bottom of the body tag close just before the closing tag. Understanding the reason of this behaviour it is important to consider the reason of JavaScript. What is the purpose of using JavaScript? As can be expected the answer is really straight forward. To put an interaction layer to the site. It enables additional functionality like load more or adding onClick Events to the page. All in All a page without JavaScript should be readable as well. That is the reason why JavaScript is not needed to provide it on page rendering. Furthermore, it is recommended to load it after everything else is loaded. To enhance the loading speed of all scripts it is recommended to load the vendor bundle with the async flag so that it is doing thins not always synchronous.